
--- Page 1 ---

ENGINEERING DRAWING
(NSQF)
1 YEAR
Revised Syllabus - 2022
Group 9
Group 9 CTS Trades Covered
Sheet Metal
DIRECTORATE GENERAL OF TRAINING
MINISTRY OF SKILL DEVELOPMENT & ENTREPRENEURSHIP
GOVERNMENTOF INDIA
NATIONAL INSTRUCTIONAL
MEDIA INSTITUTE, CHENNAI
Post Box No. 3142, CTI Campus, Guindy, Chennai - 600 032
(i)

--- Page 2 ---

Engineering Drawing (NSQF) - 1 Year
Group 9 - Engineering Trade
As per Revised syllabus 2022 under CTS
Developed & Printed by
National Instructional Media Institute
Post Box No.3142
Guindy, Chennai - 600032
INDIA
Email: chennai-nimi@nic.in
Website: www.nimi.gov.in
Copyright © 2022 National Instructional Media Institute, Chennai
First Edition : May 2022 Copies : 500
Rs. /-
(ii)

--- Page 3 ---

FOREWORD
The Government of India has set an ambitious target of imparting skills to 30 crores people, one out of
every four Indians, by 2020 to help them secure jobs as part of the National Skills Development Policy.
Industrial Training Institutes (ITIs) play a vital role in this process especially in terms of providing skilled
manpower. Keeping this in mind, and for providing the current industry relevant skill training to Trainees,
ITI syllabus has been recently updated with the help of comprising various stakeholder's viz. Industries,
Entrepreneurs, Academicians and representatives from ITIs.
The National Instructional Media Institute (NIMI), Chennai, has now come up with instructional material to
suit the revised curriculum for Engineering Drawing 1 Year NSQF Group 9 - Engineering Trade
under CTS will help the trainees to get an international equivalency standard where their skill proficiency
and competency will be duly recognized across the globe and this will also increase the scope of
recognition of prior learning. NSQF trainees will also get the opportunities to promote life long learning and
skill development. I have no doubt that with NSQF the trainers and trainees of ITIs, and all stakeholders
will derive maximum benefits from these IMPs and that NIMI's effort will go a long way in improving the
quality of Vocational training in the country.
The Executive Director & Staff of NIMI and members of Media Development Committee deserve appreciation
for their contribution in bringing out this publication.
Jai Hind
SHRI. ATUL KUMAR TIWARI., I.A.S.,
Director General/Addl. Secretary
Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship,
Government of India.
New Delhi - 110 001
(iii)

--- Page 4 ---

PREFACE
The National Instructional Media Institute(NIMI) was set up at Chennai, by the Directorate General of Training,
Ministry of skill Development and Entrepreneurship, Government of India, with the technical assistance
from the Govt of the Federal Republic of Germany with the prime objective of developing and disseminating
instructional Material for various trades as per prescribed syllabus and Craftsman Training Programme(CTS)
under NSQF levels.
The Instructional materials are developed and produced in the form of Instructional Media Packages (IMPs),
consisting of Trade Theory, Trade Practical, Test and Assignment Book, Instructor Guide, Wall charts,
Transparencies and other supportive materials. The above material will enable to achieve overall improvement
in the standard of training in ITIs.
A national multi-skill programme called SKILL INDIA, was launched by the Government of India, through a
Gazette Notification from the Ministry of Finance (Dept of Economic Affairs), Govt of India, dated 27th
December 2013, with a view to create opportunities, space and scope for the development of talents of
Indian Youth, and to develop those sectors under Skill Development.
The emphasis is to skill the Youth in such a manner to enable them to get employment and also improve
Entrepreneurship by providing training, support and guidance for all occupation that were of traditional
types. The training programme would be in the lines of International level, so that youths of our Country can
get employed within the Country or Overseas employment. The National Skill Qualification Framework
(NSQF), anchored at the National Skill Development Agency(NSDA), is a Nationally Integrated Education
and competency-based framework, to organize all qualifications according to a series of levels of Knowledge,
Skill and Aptitude. Under NSQF the learner can acquire the Certification for Competency needed at any
level through formal, non-formal or informal learning.
The Engineering Drawing 1 Year NSQF Group 9 - Engineering Trade under CTS is one of the book
developed by the core group members as per the NSQF syllabus.
The Engineering Drawing 1 Year NSQF Group 9 - Engineering Trade under CTS as per NSQF) is the
outcome of the collective efforts of experts from Field Institutes of DGT, Champion ITI’s for each of the
Sectors, and also Media Development Committee (MDC) members and Staff of NIMI. NIMI wishes that the
above material will fulfill to satisfy the long needs of the trainees and instructors and shall help the trainees
for their Employability in Vocational Training.
NIMI would like to take this opportunity to convey sincere thanks to all the Members and Media Development
Committee (MDC) members.
Chennai - 600 032 EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
(iv)

--- Page 5 ---

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The National Instructional Media Institute (NIMI) sincerely acknowledge with thanks the co-operation and
contribution of the following Media Developers to bring this IMP for the course Engineering Drawing 1 Year
Group 9 - Engineering Trade as per NSQF.
MEDIA DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE MEMBERS
Shri. M. Sangara pandian - Training Officer (Retd.)
CTI, Govt. of India,
Guindy, Chennai - 32.
Shri. G. Sathiamoorthy - Jr.Training Officer - SG (Retd.)
Govt I.T.I, Trichy, DET - Tamilnadu.
Smt. M.V. Vijayavalli - Assistant Training Officer,
Govt. I.T.I., Guindy, DET - Tamilnadu.
NIMI CO-ORDINATORS
Shri. Nirmalya Nath - Deputy General Manager,
NIMI, Chennai - 32.
Shri. G. Michael Johny - Manager,
NIMI, Chennai - 32.
NIMI records its appreciation of the Data Entry, CAD, DTP Operators for their excellent and devoted services in
the process of development of this IMP.
NIMI also acknowledges with thanks, the efforts rendered by all other staff who have contributed for the development
of this book.
(v)

--- Page 6 ---

INTRODUCTION
Theory and procedure along with the related exercises for further practice
This book on theory and procedure along with related exercises contains theoretical information on 1 Year
Engineering drawing NSQF (Revised syllabus 2022 Group 9 - Engineering Trade) and procedure of drawing/
sketching different exercise for further practice are also available. Wherever required, BIS specification has been
used.
Exercise for further practice
The practice exercise is given with Theory and procedure for 1st Year book made obsolete as it was felt that, it is
very difficult to work in workbook using drawing instruments. It is well known fact that, any drawing is prepared on
suitable standard size of drawing sheets only.
The instructor is herewith advised to go through the instructions given below and to follow them in view of imparting
much drawing skill in the trainees.
Acquiring the above said ability and doing small drawings is not a simple task. These books will provide a good
platform for achieving the said skills.
Time allotment:
Duration of 1st Year : 40 Hrs
Sl. No. Topic Exercise No. Time Allotment
1 Introduction to Engineering Drawing and 1.1.01 - 1.1.05 2
Drawing Instruments
2 Lines and Free hand drawing 1.2.06 - 1.2.09 6
3 Drawing 1.3.10 - 1.3.13 8
4 Dimensioning 1.4.14 - 1.4.16 2
5 Concept and Reading of Drawing 1.5.17 - 1.5.19 10
6 Symbolic Representation 1.6.20 4
7 Reading of Job drawing of related trades 1.7.21 8
40 Hrs
Instructions to the Instructors
It is suggested to get the drawing prepared on A4/A3 sheets preferably on only one side. If separate table and chair
facility is available for every trainee then it is preferred to use A3 sheets and if the drawing hall is provided with
desks then A4 sheets may be used. However while preparing bigger drawings on A4 sheets suitable reduction
scale to be used or multiple sheets may be used for detailed and assembly drawings.
First the border and the title block to be drawn only for the first sheet of the chapter. Eg. for conical sections only
first sheet will have the title block whereas the rest of the sheets of that chapter will have only borders.
Serial number of sheet and total no. of sheets to be mentioned on each sheet.
The completed sheet to be punched and filled in a box file/ suitable files and preserved by the trainees carefully
after the approval of instructor, VP and Principal of the Institute.
The file may be referred by the authority before granting the internal marks at the end of the Year.
LEARNING / ASSESSABLE OUTCOME
On completion of this book you shall be able to
• Read and apply engineering drawing for different application in the field of work.
(vi)

--- Page 7 ---

CONTENTS
Exercise No. Topic of the Exercise Page No.
Introduction to Engineering Drawing and Drawing Instruments
1.1.01 Introduction to engineering drawing and drawing instruments 1
1.1.02 Conventions 4
1.1.03 Sizes and layout of drawing sheets 5
1.1.04 Title block, its position and content 7
1.1.05 Drawing instruments 11
Lines and Free hand drawing
1.2.06 Lines - Types and applications in drawing 16
1.2.07 Free hand drawing of - Geometrical figures and block with dimension 22
1.2.08 Free hand drawing of - Transferring measurement from the given object to
the free hand sketches 25
1.2.09 Free hand drawing of hand tools and measuring tools 29
Drawing
1.3.10 Drawing of angle & triangle 35
1.3.11 Drawing of circle 38
1.3.12 Drawing of square, rectangle and parallelogram 40
1.3.13 Drawing of ellipse & parabola 42
1.3.14 Drawing of lettering and numbering - Single stroke 46
1.3.15 Drawing of development of surfaces - Introduction 50
1.3.16 Drawing of development of surfaces - Procedure 52
Dimensioning
1.4.17 Dimensioning - Types of arrow heads and leader line with text 57
1.4.18 Dimensioning - Position of dimensioning (aligned, unidirectional) 58
1.4.19 Practice of dimensioning 60
Concept and Reading of Drawing
1.5.20 Concept and reading of drawing in - Concept of axes plane and quadrant 63
1.5.21 Concept and reading of drawing in - Concept of orthographic projection and
isometric projection 66
1.5.22 Method of 1st angle and 3rd angle projections (Definition and difference) 72
Symbolic Representation
1.6.20 Symbolic representaion - Different symbols used in the sheet metal trade 74
Reading of Job drawing of related trades
1.7.21 Reading of job drawing related to sheet metal trade 77
(vii)

--- Page 8 ---

SYLLABUS
1 Year Group 9 - Revised syllabus 2022 Duration: 1 Year
Engineering trades under CTS
CTS Trades Covered: Mason
S.no. Syllabus Time in Hrs
1 Introduction to Engineering Drawing and Drawing Instruments – 2
• Conventions
• Sizes and layout of drawing sheets
• Title Block, its position and content
• Drawing Instrument
2 Lines - Types and applications in drawing 6
Free hand drawing of -
• Geometrical figures and blocks with dimension
• Transferring measurement from the given object to the free hand sketches.
• Free hand drawing of hand tools and measuring tools.
3 Drawing of - 8
• Angle, Triangle, Circle, Rectangle, Square, Parallelogram, Ellipse & Parabola.
• Lettering & Numbering - Single Stroke.
• Development of Surfaces
4 Dimensioning 2
• Types of arrowhead
• Leader line with text
• Position of dimensioning (Unidirectional, Aligned)
5 Concept and reading of Drawing in 10
• Concept of axes plane and quadrant
• Concept of Orthographic and Isometric projections
• Method of first angle and third angle projections (definition and difference)
6 Symbolic representation - 4
• Different symbols used in the Sheet Metal trade.
7 Reading of Job drawing related to Sheet Metal trade. 8
Total 40
(viii)

--- Page 9 ---

Group 9 - Engineering Trades Exercise 1.1.01
Engineering Drawing
Introduction to engineering drawing and drawing instruments
Communication
Equally important, the components shown on the drawings
There are many different ways of communicating ideas, could be made by suitably skilled craftsmen of any
information, instructions, requests, etc. They can be nationality provided they can “read” an engineering drawing.
transmitted by signs or gestures, by word of mouth, in
Conventionally prepared engineering drawings provide the
writing, or graphically. In an industrial context the graphical
main means of communication between the “ideas” men
method is commonly used with communication is achieved
(the designers and draughtsman) and the craftsmen
by means of engineering drawings.
(machinists, fitters, assemblers, etc.). For the
If oral and written communicati on only were used when communication to be effective, everyone concerned must
dealing with technical matters, misunderstandings could interpret the drawing in the same way. Only then will the
arise, particularly in relation to shape and size. The lack finished product be exactly as the designer envisages it.
of a universal spoken language makes communication and
To ensure uniformity of interpretation, the British Standards
understanding even more difficult because of the necessity
Institution has prepared a booklet entitled BS 308:1972,
to translate both words and meaning from one language
Engineering Drawing Practice. Now in three parts, this
to another.
publication recommends the methods which should be
However, the universally accepted methods used in adopted for the preparation of drawing used in the
graphical communication through engineering drawings engineering industry.
eliminate many of these difficulties and make it possible
The standards and conventions in most common use and
for drawing prepared by a British designer to be correctly
hence those required for a basic understanding of engineering
interpreted or “read” by, for example, his German, French
drawing are illustrated and explained in this book.
or Dutch counterparts.
Language
1 It is the media of communication (Fig 1)
1

--- Page 10 ---

Conclusion Technical drawings
Effective communication is possible when graphical Technical drawings allows efficient communication among
language is supported by written language/vocal language engineers and can be kept as a record of the planning
and vice versa. process. Since a picture is worth a thousand words, a
technical drawing is a much more effective tool for
Engineering drawing is a language that uses both graphical
engineers than a written plan.
language and written language for effective communication.
The technical drawing, on the other hand is not subtle, or
Engineering drawing is a graphical language that
abstract. It does not require an understanding of its creator,
also uses written language for effective
only on understanding of technical drawings. A technical
communication.
drawing is a means of clearly and concisely communicating
The importance of Engineering Drawing all of the information necessary to transform an idea or a
concept in to reality. Therefore, a technical drawing often
The economic success of any country is mainly dependent
contains more than just a graphic representation of its
on its industrial development. Due to globalization, any
subject. It also contains dimensions, notes and
industry in our country is expected to be of a global market
specifications.
standard. For the above-mentioned reasons, our Indian
products require very high quality for their size, dimension, Fields of use
fit, tolerance, and finish etc.
Technical drawing is the preferred method of drafting in all
To produce the best standard product, all the technical engineering fields, including, but not limited to, civil
personnel (Engineers to Craftsman) in an industry must engineering, electrical engineering, mechanical engineering
have a sound knowledge of engineering drawing because and architecture.
engineering drawing is the language of engineers.
Purpose of studying engineering drawing
Engineering drawing is a universal language. Different
types of lines make up their alphabets. Technical personnel 1 To develop the ability to produce simple engineering
in any industry, including craftsman, are expected to drawing and sketches based on current practice
communicate anything concerning a part or a component
2 To develop the skills to read manufacturing and
by means of drawings involving lines, symbols,
construction drawings used in industry.
conventions, abbreviations etc.
3 To develop a working knowledge of the layout of plant
With our spoken languages, it is impossible to express
and equipment.
the details of a job or a product. Engineering drawing
knowledge and practise are a must for designing or 4 To develop skills in abstracting information from
producing a component or part. Even a small mistake in calculation sheets and schematic diagrams to produce
the drawing may reflect very badly on the product. Therefore, working drawings for manufacturers, installers and
reading and doing engineering drawings are very essential fabricators.
for craftsmen and engineers.
Main types of Engineering drawing
A drawing is a graphical representation of an object, or
Regardless of branch of engineering the engineering drawing
part of it, and is the result of creative thought by an engineer
is used. However based on the major engineering
or technician. When one person sketches a rough map in
branches, engineering drawing can be classified as follows:
giving direction to another, this is graphic communication.
(Fig 2)
Graphic communication involves using visual materials to
relate ideas. Drawings, photographs, slides, Mechanical Engineering drawings
transparencies, and sketches are all forms of graphic
Some examples of mechanical engineering drawings are
communication. Any medium that uses a graphic image
part and assembly drawings, riveted joints, welded joints,
to aid in conveying a message, instructions, or an idea is
fabrication drawings, pneumatics and hydraulics drawings,
involved in graphic communication.
pipeline diagrams, keys coupling drawings etc. (Fig 3&4)
One of the most widely used forms of graphic
Electrical engineering drawing
communication is the drawing. Technically, it can be
defined as "a graphic representation of an idea, a Wiring diagrams of home and industries, circuit diagrams,
concept or an entity which actually or potentially electrical installation drawings etc.
exists in life"
Example
Drawing is one of the oldest forms of communicating,
The voltage supply to a filament lamp is 10.8V. The voltage
dating back even farther than verbal communication. The
should be 12V. (Fig 5)
drawing itself is a method of communicating necessary
information about an abstract, such as an idea or concept
or a graphic representation of some real entity, such as a
machine part, house or tools. There are two basic types
of drawings: Artistic and Technical drawings.
2 Engineering Drawing : (NSQF - Revised 2022) 1st Year Group 9 : Exercise 1.1.01

--- Page 11 ---

Mechanical Engineering Drawings (Fig 3&4) Electrical Engineering Drawing (Fig 5)
Electronics Engineering Drawing
Audio amplifier (Fig 6)
Civil Engineering Drawing (Fig 7)
3

--- Page 12 ---

Group 9 - Engineering Trades Exercise 1.1.02
Engineering Drawing
Conventions
TYPE CONVENTION MATERIALS
Steel, Cast Iron, Copper and its Alloys,
Aluminium and its alloy, etc
Metals
Lead, Zinc, Tin, White-metal, etc.
Glass Glass
Porcelain, Stoneware, Marble, Slate etc
Packing and Insulating Asbestos, Fibre, Felt, Synthetic resin
materials products, Paper, Cork, Linoleum,
Rubber, Leather, Wax, insulating &
Filling Materials etc
Liquid Water, Oil, Petrol, Kerosene etc
Wood Wood, Plywood etc
Concrete Concrete
4

--- Page 13 ---

Group 9 - Engineering Trades Exercise 1.1.03
Engineering Drawing
Sizes and layout of drawing sheets
Size of drawing sheets (in mm): While being worked on
or handled, the drawing sheets are prone to tear along the
edges. So slightly larger(untrimmed) sheets are preferred.
They are trimmed afterwards. IS:10811:1983 lays down such
as designation of preferred trimmed and untrimmed sizes.
Designation of sheets: The drawing sheets are designated
by symbols such as A0, A1, A2, A3, A4 and A5. A0 being
the largest and A5 is smallest. Table 1 below gives the
length and breadth of the above sizes of sheets. (Trimmed
and untrimmed)
The relationship between two sides is same as that
between a side of a square and its diagonal.
TABLE 1
Designation Trimmed size Untrimmed size
A0 841 x 1189 880 x 1230
A1 594 x 841 625 x 880
A2 420 x 594 450 x 625
A3 297 x 420 330 x 450
A4 210 x 297 240 x 330
A5 148 x 210 165 x 240
Special elongated series increasing its widths, double,
treble etc. are denoted as follows A3 x 3, A3 x 4, A4 x 3,
A4 x 4, A4 x 5. Please refer Table 2.
TABLE 2 The following is the method of folding printed drawing sheets
as recommended by BIS. (Fig 3)
Special elongated series
Method of folding of printed drawing sheets as per
Designation Size
BIS SP: 46-2003
A3 x 3 420 x 891
When drawings sheets are in more numbers, they have to
A3 x 4 420 x 1189
be folded and kept in order to save the trace required for
A4 x 3 297 x 630 preserving them (Fig 4).
A4 x 4 297 x 841
A4 x 5 297 x 1051
Fig 1 & 2 shows how the sheet sizes are formed by halving/
doubling and similarity of format.
White drawing papers that do not turn yellow on exposure
to air are used for finished drawings, maps, charts and
drawings for photographic reproductions.
For pencil layouts and working drawings, cream-coloured
papers are best suited.
Quality drawing paper: The drawing papers should have
sufficient teeth or grain to take the pencil lines and
withstand repeated erasing.
To get uniform lines, backing paper is to be placed on the
drawing board before fixing drawing/tracing paper,. Before
starting the drawing, the layout should be drawn. (Ref:
IS:10711)
5

--- Page 14 ---

Method of folding printed drawing sheets (Fig 3)
6 Engineering Drawing : (NSQF - Revised 2022) 1st Year Group 9 : Exercise 1.1.03

--- Page 15 ---

Group 9 - Engineering Trades Exercise 1.1.04
Engineering Drawing
Title block, its position and content
Layout of drawing sheet:
As a standard practice sufficient margins are to be provided
on all sides of the drawing sheet. The drawing sheet should
have drawing space and title space. A typical layout of a
drawing sheet is shown in the (Fig 1 & 2).
Title Block - 1
7

--- Page 16 ---

Title Block - 2
Fig 3
Title Block - 3
Fig 4
8 Engineering Drawing : (NSQF - Revised 2022) 1 Year Group 9 : Exercise 1.1.03

--- Page 17 ---

Title Block - Position and content - 1
Engineering Drawing : (NSQF - Revised 2022) 1 Year Group 9 : Exercise 1.1.03 9

--- Page 18 ---

Title Block - Position and content - 2
Item Reference on Drawing Sheet
05 TIGHTENING PIN 01 MILD STEEL
04 WORK PIECE 01 ANY MATL.
03 SCREW ROD 01 STD.
02 “U” CLAMP 01 CAST IRON
01 “V” BLOCK 01 CAST IRON
PART NO DESCRIPTION OF ITEM QTY/ASSY MATERIAL REMARKS
BILL OF MATERIALS
The drawing sheet on which the drawings to be prepared 3 Follow the same procedure for A3 drawing sheet where
should be prepared first by following the procedure given the title block is to be drawn right side bottom corner
below: and the border dimensions remain same.
1 Take A4/A3 drawing sheet. 4 Title block to be drawn whenever the title of the drawing
changes. Eg. for the geometrical construction chapter
2 Mark the borders and draw the title block as mentioned.
the title block may be drawn in the first sheet only where
as on the remaining sheets borders to be drawn before
they are used for preparing drawings.
10 Engineering Drawing : (NSQF - Revised 2022) 1 Year Group 9 : Exercise 1.1.03

--- Page 19 ---

Group 9 - Engineering Trades Exercise 1.1.05
Engineering Drawing
Drawing instruments
The following are the commonly used equipment in a
Sl. No. Designation Blade length
drawing office.
Drawing board (Fig 1): Drawing board is one of the main 1 T0 1500
item of equipment for Draughtsman. It is used for supporting
2 T1 1000
the drawing paper/tracing paper for making drawings. It is
made of well-seasoned wood strips of about 25 mm thick 3 T2 700
or masonite, free from knots and warping. It should be
4 T3 500
softer enough to allow insertion and removal of drawing
pins. Two battens are fastened to the board by screws, in
The 'T' square is used with its head against the ebony edge
slotted joints. They prevent warping and at the same time
of the drawing board to draw horizontal lines, and parallel
permit expansion and contraction of the strips due to the
lines and to guide/hold the set squares, stencils etc.
change of moisture in the atmosphere.
Fig 2b shows how the 'T' square is used.
'T' square should never be used as a hammer or as a guide
for trimming papers.
One of the shorter edges of the drawing board is provided
with an "ebony edge" (hardwood) fitted perfectly straight.
Standard drawing boards are designated as follows as per
IS:1444-1989.
Sl. No. Designation Size (mm)
1 D0 1500 x 1000 x 25
2 D1 1000 x 700 x 25
3 D2 700 x 500 x 15
4 D3 500 x 350 x 15
The working edge (ebony) must be straight.
Now-a-days drawing boards are available with laminated
surfaces. The flatness can be checked by placing a
straight edge on its surface. If no light passes between Drafting in the machine (Fig 3): It serves the functions of
them, the surface is perfectly flat. a Tee square, set square, protractor and scale. They come
in different sizes and have a pattern called the 'Pantograph'
'T' Square: It is of 'T' shape, made of well-seasoned wood.
type. It is fitted on the top left side, edge of the drafting
It has two parts., head/stock and blade. One of the edges
board, mounted on an adjustable frame or table. It requires
of the blade is the working edge. The blade is screwed to
a large area of working place. The angle of the drafting board
this head such that the working edge is at a right angle to
can be adjusted by the pedal operating system. There are
the head. (Fig 2a)
two counterweights to balance the angular position of the
The standard 'T' square is designated as follows with board and the drafting head. It is more suitable for the
dimensions shown in mm; as per IS:1360-1989. production drawing office.
11

--- Page 20 ---

On the other end, a protractor head H with swivelling and
locking arrangement is fitted with two scales at right
angles.
The protractor head has a spring-loaded clutch relieving
handle, which rotates and locks at 15° intervals
automatically. For setting any angle other than multiples of
15°, the clutch spring is released and by rotating the centre
knob, the zero line is set to the required angle and the
friction clutch knob is tightened. It is capable of rotating Erasing shield: When, on a drawing, if a part of a line or
180°, thereby any angle can be set. some lines among many other lines needs to be erased or
modified, in a normal way erasing will damage the other
The scales are bevelled on both sides, graduates to 1:1 &
nearby lines. In such a situation an erasing shield is
1:2. They can be reversed with the help of dovetail slide
effectively useful. It is a thin metallic sheet having small
fitting.
openings of different sizes and shapes. A suitable opening
There is a fine adjusting mechanism on the drafting head is aligned to the line to be erased and the line is removed
to set the scale parallel to the edge of the board. The scales by the eraser. (Fig 7)
also can be adjusted if there is an error in measuring 90°
between them.
The mini drafter is an important device used for making
drawing quickly & accurately. This instrument has the
combination of T-square, set square, protractor and scales,
it helps to draw the drawings at a faster rate. (Fig 4,5 & 6)
Set square (IS:1361-1988): Transparent celluloid /Plastic
set squares are preferred and are commonly used rather
than ebonite ones. They are two in number, each having
one corner with 90°. The set square with 60° & 30° of
250 mm long and 45° of 200mm long is convenient for use.
(Fig 8)
12 Engineering Drawing : (NSQF - Revised 2022) 1 Year Group 9 : Exercise 1.2.05

--- Page 21 ---

Scales: Scales are used to transfer and or measure the
dimensions. They are made of wood, steel, ivory, celluloid
or plastic, stainless steel scales are more durable. different
types of scales used are shown in Fig 9. They are either flat,
bevel-edged or triangular cross-sections. Scales of 15cm
long, 2cm wide or 30cm long 3.5cm wide are in general use.
An instrument box contains the following: (Fig 13a to h)
Protractor: A protractor is an instrument for measuring • Large compass (with attachment facility) (a)
angles. It is semi-circular or circular and is made of a flat
• Large divider (b)
celluloid sheet.
• Bow compasses(pencil/ink), bow divider (c)
The angles can be set or measured from both sides,
aligning the reference line and point '0' with the corner point • Lengthening bar (d)
of the angle.
• Pen point for attachment (e)
Figure 10 shows how to read or set the angle. A protractor
• Screwdriver (f)
can also be used to divide a circle or draw sectors.
• Lead case (g)
• Liner (h)
Large compass (Fig 14): It has a knee joint in one leg that
permits the insertion of a pen or pencil point or attaching a
lengthening bar with a pen or pencil point attached to it. It
is used for drawing large circles/arcs and also for taking
large measurements.
French curves (Fig 11)
These are made in many different shapes, normally come
in sets of 6,12,16 etc. French curves are best suited to draw
smooth curves/ arcs (which cannot be drawn by a compass)
with ease. To draw a smooth curve using a french curve first
As a rule, while drawing concentric circles,
set it by trial against a part of the line to be drawn, then shift
small circles should be drawn first before the
it to the next portions.
centre hole gets worn.
Fig 12 shows how to use the french curve and draw smooth
Large divider: It is used to transfer dimensions and divide
curves. They are made of transparent celluloid (no bevel
lines into several equal parts. Divider with adjustable joints
edge).
is preferable rather than plain legs. (Fig 15)
Engineering Drawing : (NSQF - Revised 2022) 1 Year Group 9 : Exercise 1.2.05 13

--- Page 22 ---

Fig 16 shows different types of bow instruments. Adjustments
should be made with the thumb and middle finger.
Drop spring bow pencil and pen (Fig 17): Drop spring
bow pencil and pen are designed for drawing multiple
identical small circles. Example: rivet holes, drilled/ reamed
holes. The central pin is made to move freely up and down
through the tube attached to the pen or pencil unit.
Inking pen or liner or ruling pen (Fig 18): It is used to
ink the straight lines drawn with the instruments but never
for freehand lines or lettering.
Bow instruments: Bow pencil and bow pen compass are
used for drawing circles of approximately 25 mm radius.
A bow divider is used for marking or dividing smaller
spaces. There are two types (i) Integral legs with spring
action (ii) two legs are held with a curved spring on top with
a handle on it.
14 Engineering Drawing : (NSQF - Revised 2022) 1 Year Group 9 : Exercise 1.2.05

--- Page 23 ---

Lengthening bar (Fig 19): To draw larger circles, it is fitted Pencils, Grade and Selection (Fig 23)
to the compass. The pencil point or pen point is inserted
into its end.
Replaceable spare pencils, pens and needle points for the
compass are available in the instrument box.
Screwdriver (Fig 20): Used for adjusting the screws of the
instruments.
Grades of pencils: Pencils are graded according to the
hardness or softness of the lead.
The hardest pencil is 9H grade and the softest pencil
Lead case (Fig 21): Lead case is the box for holding the
is 7B grade. The selection of the grade of pencils depends
pencil leads.
on the type of line work required and the paper on which it
is used.
Softer lead pencils are used to produce thicker and darker
line work, but they wear out quickly. Medium grades of H
and 2H are used for general line work as well as for lettering.
Selection of pencils: Pencil grades vary from one brand
Pin, Clip, Cello tape: Drawing sheet should be fastened
to another brand. Select the grades of the pencil depending
onto the drawing board firmly temporarily so that it does not
upon the type of line work. For construction lines, you can
shake during preparing the drawing. For this purpose, the
choose 2H or 3H, for lettering and object lines grade H
pins, clips and cello tapes are used (Fig 22)
pencils. In general H, HB and 2H are used.
H - medium-hard
HB - medium-soft
2H - hard
Now-a-days automatic (Mechanical) pencils or clutch
pencils are available in different sizes (lead dia. 0.3, 0.5, 0.7
or 0.9). Leads can be replaced as per the required grade of
hardness. They produce lines of uniform width without
sharpening.
Engineering Drawing : (NSQF - Revised 2022) 1 Year Group 9 : Exercise 1.2.05 15

--- Page 24 ---

Group 9 - Engineering Trades Exercise 1.2.06
Engineering Drawing
Lines - Types and applications in drawing
Drawings are made up of different types of lines. Just a Technical drawings are drawn with different types of lines.
language with alphabet and grammar. By proper choice and application of lines, product features
can be correctly defined in a drawing. Different types of
Lines of different thicknesses and features are used for
lines recommended for specific applications are given in
specific use. (Fig 1 and 2)
Table 1.
Table 1
Types of lines and their application
Lines Description General applications
See figure and other relevant figure
Continuous thick A1 Visible outlines
A2 Visible edges
Continuous thin B1 Imaginary lines of intersection
(straight) B2 Dimension lines
B3 projection lines or extension line
B4 Leader lines
B5 Hatching
B6 Outlines of revolved sections in place
B7 Short centre lines
B8 Thread line
B9 Diagonal line
Continuous thin C1 Limits of partial or interrupted views &
free hand sections, if the limit is not a chain thin
Continuous thin D1 Line (See figures)
(Straight) with zig-zags
Dashed thick E1 Hidden outlines
E2 Hidden edges
Dashed thin F1 Hidden outlines
F2 Hidden edges
Chain thin G1 Centre lines
G2 Lines of symmetry
G3 Trajectories
Chain thin, thick at ends H1 Cutting planes
& changes of direction
Chain thick J1 Indication of lines or surfaces to
which a special requirement applies
Chain thin double- K1 Outlines of adjacent parts
dashed K2 Alternative and extreme positions of
movable parts
K3 Centroidal lines
K4 Initial outlines prior to forming
K5 Parts situated in front of the cutting plane
1 This type of line is suited for production of drawings by machines.
2 Although two alternatives are available, it is recommended that on any one drawing, only one type of line be used.
In the above range, for craftsmen, 0.5 is preferred. Table 2 The numbers on the right side of the lines refer to the line
shows the 0.5 line range and other lines under this range. thickness in mm.
16

--- Page 25 ---

Table 2
Hatching lines (B5): Hatching lines are the lines inclined
parallel lines. The minimum space between these lines
should be more than twice the thickness of the heaviest line
in the drawing. It is recommended that these spacings
should never be less than 0.7 mm. (Fig 4)
For showing the limits of partial or interrupted views and
sections continuous thin freehand lines (C1) or continuous
thin straight lines with zig-zag (D1) are used. (Fig 6)
All the views of a component drawn to one particular scale
should have the same range of line thickness.
Types of lines: Ten types of lines are used in general
engineering drawing as per IS:10714-1983. Which first four
types of lines are continuous lines of both thick and thin.
(Type A to D)
A continuous thick line (A-type) is used for drawing visible
outlines (A1) and visible edges (A2). (Fig 3) These lines are
also called object lines
Lines of type E to K in Table 1 are of the non-continuous
type. Some of these are thin and some are thick. For
hidden lines both thick and thin dashes (E & F type) are
available, it is recommended that on anyone drawing, only
one type of (Thick or thin) line be used. (Fig 7)
Continuous thin lines (B type): Continues thin lines are
used for many applications as stated in Table 1. A few
applications of B types of lines are shown in Fig 4.
Chain lines (Thin): Chain lines are used for drawing centre
lines of circles, cylinders etc. Same lines are also used to
show the axis of symmetry in symmetrical objects. The
line of symmetry is identified at its ends by two thin short
parallel lines drawn at right angles to it. (Fig 8)
A leader line - B4 (Fig 4): A leader line is a line referring
to a feature (dimension, object, outline etc). A leader line
should terminate.
• with a dot
• with an arrow head
• without a dot or arrow head (Fig 5)
Engineering Drawing : (NSQF - Revised 2022) 1 Year Group 9 : Exercise 1.2.06 17

--- Page 26 ---

Another method of representing symmetrical shape is to
extend the object lines beyond the axis of the symmetry.
(Fig 9) In this case, the short parallel lines described above
are omitted. The same lines are also used to show the
repetitions of features of a component. (Fig 10)
For drawing a sectional view, the plane of cutting is to be
shown in another view. The cutting plane (H1) in Table 1 is
drawn with a thin chain, thick at the ends and also at the
K3 - Centroidal lines (Fig 14)
places of direction change. (Figs 11 & 12)
K4 - Initial outlines brefore forming (Fig 15)
If thick chain lines (J1) in table 1 are drawn on a surface, it
indicates some special treatment/application on that
surface. (Fig 13)
Chain thin double dashed (K) lines are applied for the
following:
K1 - Outlines of adjacent parts (Fig 13) K5 - Parts situated in front of the cutting plane
(Fig 16)
K2 - Alternative and extreme positions of moving
parts. (Fig 13)
18 Engineering Drawing : (NSQF - Revised 2022) 1 Year Group 9 : Exercise 1.2.06

--- Page 27 ---

Lines - Drawing lines of a given length (straight,
curved), drawing parallel lines, perpendicular lines
Tangent line (Fig 24)
and methods of division of line segment
There are a lot of ways to define straight and curved lines;
the most elaborate way to define them is the following:
• A straight line is a succession of points that are aligned
in the same direction. Or in other words, to go from one
point to another, we never change direction. (Fig 17)
4 Easy ways to draw curved line (Fig 25)
• On the contrary, the points of a curved line do change
direction from one point to the next. (Fig 18)
Drawing curved dashed line (Fig 26)
• If there aren’t any obstacles, there are plenty of ways
to do this…for example: (Fig 19 to 23)
Exercise 1
How to draw six horizontal parallel lines of 50 mm
long with 10 mm intervals (Fig 1).
Engineering Drawing : (NSQF - Revised 2022) 1 Year Group 9 : Exercise 1.2.06 19

--- Page 28 ---

Use a sharpened conical point pencil.
Keep the pencil slightly inclined towards the
direction of the movement.
While drawing rotates the pencil to keep the
constant thickness.
Maintain uniform pressure on the lead of the
pencil.
Exercise 2
How to draw six vertical parallel lines of 50 mm
length with 10 mm intervals (Fig 2).
Draw the vertical lines from bottom to top. 2 To draw vertical thick and thin lines. (Fig 2)
Exercise 3
How to draw 45° inclined lines (Fig 3).
Draw lines from bottom to top.
Sketch by free hand
Sketch the following practice No.1 to 3 in A3/A4 sheets.
Practice
1 To draw horizontal thick and thin lines. (Fig 1)
20 Engineering Drawing : (NSQF - Revised 2022) 1 Year Group 9 : Exercise 1.2.06

--- Page 29 ---

3 Sketch the inclined lines as shown in figure with Horizontal line (Fig 6): Horizontal lines are those which
thick and thin lines. (Fig 3) are parallel to a horizontal plane. An example of the
horizontal plane is the surface of still water. (Fig 6)
Vertical line (Fig 7a): Lines that are perpendicular to
horizontal lines are called vertical lines. It can be treated as
a line along the plumb line of the plumb bob or parallel to
a plumb line. (Fig 7b)
Inclined line or Oblique line: A straight line that is neither
horizontal nor vertical is called an inclined line. (Fig 8)
Types of lines Curved line: It is the path of a point that always changes
A point represents a location in space, having no width or its direction. Examples of curved lines are shown in (Fig 9).
height. It is represented by drawing the intersection of lines
or a dot. (Fig 4)
Parallel lines: They are the lines with the same distance
between them. They may be straight lines or curved lines
Parallel lines do not meet when extended. (Fig 10)
A line is the path of a point when it moves. It has no
thickness and is of two types:
i Straight line and ii Curved line
Straight-line: It is the path of a point when it is moving in
a particular direction. It has only length and no width. (Fig
5) Also, a straight line is the shortest distance between two
Perpendicular lines: When two lines meet at 90°, the two
points. Straight lines, depending on their orientation are
lines are said to be perpendicular to each other. One of the
classified as Horizontal, Vertical Inclined or Oblique lines.
lines is called a reference line. (Fig 11)
Engineering Drawing : (NSQF - Revised 2022) 1 Year Group 9 : Exercise 1.2.06 21

--- Page 30 ---

Group 9 - Engineering Trades Exercise 1.2.07
Engineering Drawing
Free hand drawing of - Geometrical figures and block with dimension
Freehand sketching: Apart from making drawing using Cylinder (Fig 5)
instruments, often craftsmen will be required to make
drawings with their free hand.
Freehand sketching is the easiest method to express the
shape of a piece part or a component by an engineer or
craftsman.
Freehand sketches are not usually made to scale. However,
they should be as nearly to the proportions as possible.
Cube (Fig 1)
Materials for free hand sketching: A4 size sheet (preferably
a pad instead of loose papers) pencils of soft grade. Example
H, HB, and a good quality eraser are the only materials
required. For drawing different darkness, the pencil points
should be sharpened to a conical shape. Fig 6 shows some
free hand sketches of different types of views.
Square block (Fig 2)
Rectangular block (Fig 3)
Procedure
Freehand drawing of solid figures, cubes, cuboids, cone,
prism, pyramid, frustum of a cone with dimensions
Cube (Fig 1)
Cube block (Fig 4)
22

--- Page 31 ---

• Draw squares of a, b, c and d. Rectangular prism (Fig 4)
• Draw 30° from points b, c and d for the length of 25mm.
• Mark point g from b, f from c and e from d as shown in
the figure.
• Joint all points.
Cuboid (Fig 2)
Draw the isometric drawing of a cuboid of base 60 mm x
40 mm and the height of 20 mm. (Fig 2)
Square Prism (Fig 5)
Draw the three isometric axes through the point 'A'.
Triangular Prism (Fig 6)
• Mark AB = 60mm, AE = 40mm and AD= 20mm
representing the three sides of cuboid.
• Draw two vertical lines EF and BC parallel to AD from
points E and B respectively.
• Similarly, draw two more lines parallel to AB and AE to
mark G's interesting point from F and C.
• Draw lines parallel to DC and FG Draw lines parallel to
DF and GC.
• Join all the points.
Cylinder (Fig 3)
Pentagonal prism (Fig 7)
Engineering Drawing : (NSQF - Revised 2022) 1 Year Group 9 : Exercise 1.2.07 23

--- Page 32 ---

Hexagonal prism (Fig 8)
Cone: When a right-angled triangle revolves about one of
its sides forming the right angle, a cone is generated. Cone
forming has a circular face and a slant curved surface.
(Fig 9)
Pyramids: Pyramids are polyhedron solids having a base
surface whose shape may be triangular, square or polygon
and as many slant triangular faces as there are sides in the Fig 12 shows frustums and truncated pyramids.
base. All the slant triangular faces join at a common point
All items we use are solids. Their shapes may confirm
called APEX.
individual geometrical solids like prisms, cones or other
Similar to prisms, pyramids also are known by the shape combinations.
of their base viz triangular, square, rectangular, pentagonal,
hexagonal etc. The imaginary line joining the centre of the
base to the apex is called the AXIS.
Fig 10 shows some pyramids and their views.
When a semi-circle revolves about its diameter a sphere is
generated. A sphere has no flat surface. (Fig 11D)
Frustums: Pyramid/cone is cut parallel to the base and the
top portion is removed. The remaining bottom portion is
called the frustum of a pyramid/cone.
If the cutting plane is at an angle to the axis/base, the
pyramids or cones are called "Truncated pyramids or
cones".
24 Engineering Drawing : (NSQF - Revised 2022) 1 Year Group 9 : Exercise 1.2.07

--- Page 33 ---

Group 9 - Engineering Trades Exercise 1.2.08
Engineering Drawing
Free hand drawing of - Transferring measurement from the given object to
the free hand sketches
25

--- Page 34 ---

26 Engineering Drawing : (NSQF - Revised 2022) 1 Year Group 9 : Exercise 1.2.08

--- Page 35 ---

Engineering Drawing : (NSQF - Revised 2022) 1 Year Group 9 : Exercise 1.2.08 27

--- Page 36 ---

28 Engineering Drawing : (NSQF - Revised 2022) 1 Year Group 9 : Exercise 1.2.08

--- Page 37 ---

Group 9 - Engineering Trades Exercise 1.2.09
Engineering Drawing
Free hand drawing of hand tools and measuring tools
Hand Tools Hacksaw (Fig 6)
Files (Fig 1)
a Curved cut file b Rasp cut file
c Single cut file d Double cut file
Ball pein hammer (Fig 7)
Scriber (Fig 2)
Chisel (Fig 8)
Bench vice (Fig 9)
Divider (Fig 3)
Outside caliper (Fig 4)
Cutting plier (Fig 10)
Inside caliper (Fig 5)
Open end spanner (Fig 11)
29

--- Page 38 ---

Measuring Tools Riveting hammer (Fig 16)
Steel rule (Fig 12)
Try square (Fig 13)
Aviation shear (Fig 17)
Rawhide mallet (Fig 14)
Creasing hammer (Fig 18)
Hollowing hammer (Fig 19)
Setting hammer (Fig 15)
Bullet hammer (Fig 20)
30 Engineering Drawing : (NSQF - Revised 2022) 1 Year Group 9 : Exercise 1.2.09

--- Page 39 ---

Planishing hammer (Fig 21) Round bottom stake (Fig 27)
Bench shear (Fig 22)
Half moon stake (Fig 28)
Straight snip (Fig 23)
Bend snip (Fig 24)
Beak or bickiron (Fig 29)
Hawk-billed shear (Fig 25)
Double-cutting shear (Fig 26)
Engineering Drawing : (NSQF - Revised 2022) 1 Year Group 9 : Exercise 1.2.09 31

--- Page 40 ---

Creasing iron (Fig 30) Tinman’s anvil (Fig 33)
Tinman’s horse (Fig 31)
Penning hammer (Fig 34)
Universal stake holder (Fig 35)
Heads (Fig 32)
Square edge (Fig 36)
32 Engineering Drawing : (NSQF - Revised 2022) 1 Year Group 9 : Exercise 1.2.09

--- Page 41 ---

Hand seamer (Fig 37) Blind rivetting equipment (Fig 41)
Hollow punch (Fig 38)
Solid punch (Fig 42)
Folding bars (Fig 39)
Iron hand punch (Fig 43)
Revolving bench plate (Fig 40)
Hand riveter (Fig 44)
Engineering Drawing : (NSQF - Revised 2022) 1 Year Group 9 : Exercise 1.2.09 33

--- Page 42 ---

Size of groove & seam (Fig 45) Tinner’s hand punch (Fig 46)
34 Engineering Drawing : (NSQF - Revised 2022) 1 Year Group 9 : Exercise 1.2.09

--- Page 43 ---

Group 9 - Engineering Trades Exercise 1.3.10
Engineering Drawing
Drawing of angle & triangle
Angles: Angle is the inclination between two straight lines
meeting at a point or meeting when extended. AB and BC
are two straight lines meeting at B. The inclination between
them is called an angle. The angle is expressed in degrees
or radians.
Concept of a degree: When the circumference of a circle
Reflex angle: It is the angle that is more than 180°, but
is divided into 360 equal parts and radial lines are drawn
less than 360°. (Fig 6)
through these points, the inclination between the two
adjacent radial lines is defined as one degree. Thus a circle
is said to contain 360°. (Fig 1)
Adjacent angles: These are the angles lying on either
side of a line. (Fig 7)
Acute angle: An angle that is less than 90° is called an
acute angle. (Fig 2)
Complementary angles: When the sum of the two
angles is equal to 90°, angle POQ + angle QOR = 90° angle
POQ and angle QOR are complementary angles to each
other. (Fig 8)
Right angle: The angle between a reference line and a
perpendicular line is called a right angle. (Fig 3)
Obtuse angle: This refers to an angle between 90° and Supplementary angle: When the sum of the two adjacent
180°. (Fig 4) angles is equal to 180°, for example, angle SOT + angle
TOY = 180°, angle SOT and angle TOY are supplementary
angles to each other. (Fig 9)
Straight angle: This refers to an angle of 180°. This is also
called the angle of a straight line. (Fig 5)
35

--- Page 44 ---

Triangle - different types
Triangle is a closed plane figure having three sides and
three angles. The sum of the three angles always equals
to 180°.
To define a triangle, we need to have a minimum of three
measurements as follows:
• 3 sides or
• 2 sides and one angle or
• 2 angles and one side
Types of triangles
1 Equilateral triangle is a triangle having all the three
sides equal. Also all the three angles are equal (60°).
(Fig 1)
2 Isosceles triangle has two of its sides equal. The angles
opposite the two equal sides are also equal. (Fig 2)
Procedure to draw the triangle
1 Equilateral triangle (Fig 1) AB = BC = CA = 35 mm.
• Draw a line and mark AB 35 mm side of the triangle.
• Draw radius from centre A and B, arcs cutting mark at
C (Fig 1).
3 Scalene triangle has all three sides unequal in length.
• Join CA and CB.
All three angles are also unequal. (Fig 3)
• ABC is a required triangle.
4 A right-angled triangle is one in which one of the
angles is equal to 90° (Right angle). The side opposite
the right angle is called the hypotenuse. (Fig 4)
5 An Acute angled triangle is one in which all the three
angles are less than 90°. (Fig 5) 2 Isosceles triangle : AB = AC = 60 mm & BAC  40.
6 Obtuse angled triangle has one of the angles more • Draw the side AB equal to 60 mm. `A' as the centre,
than 90°. (Fig 6) draw an arc of radius AB.
The sum of the three angles in any triangle is • Draw a line AC at 40° to AB.
equal to 180°.
• Join BC to form the triangle ABC. (Fig 2)
The sum of any two sides is more than the third
side.
36 Engineering Drawing : (NSQF - Revised 2022) 1 Year Group 9 : Exercise 1.3.10

--- Page 45 ---

4 Draw a triangle when one side and 2 angles being given
in Fig 4.
Exercise
1 Scalene triangle: AB = 30 mm, AC = 55 mm & BC=
35 mm. (Fig 1)
5 Draw a right angled triangle when the base and
hypotenuse being given in Fig 5.
2 Scalene triangle: AB = 70 mm. (Fig 2)
ABC  40 & BAC  110
6 Draw a triangle with the altitude and two sides being
given in Fig 6.
3 Right angled triangle: AB = 60 mm, BC = 45 mm.
(Fig 3)
Engineering Drawing : (NSQF - Revised 2022) 1 Year Group 9 : Exercise 1.3.10 37

--- Page 46 ---

Group 9 - Engineering Trades Exercise 1.3.11
Engineering Drawing
Drawing of circle
Circle: Circle is a plane figure bounded by a curve, formed
by the locus of a point which moves so that it is always at
a fixed distance from a stationary point the "Centre".
Radius: The distance from the centre to any point on the
circle is called the "Radius".
Diameter: The length of a straight line between two points
on the curve, passing through the centre is called the
"Diameter". (D: Dia or d) It is twice the radius.
Circumference: It is the linear length of the entire curve,
equal to D.
Arc: A part of the circle between any two points on the
circumference or periphery is called an 'Arc'.
Chord: A straight line joining the ends of an arc is called
the chord. (Longest chord of the circle is the diameter)
Segment: A part of the circle or area bound by the arc and
chord is the segment of the circle.
Sector: It is the part of a circle bounded by two radii (plural
of radius) meeting at an angle and an arc.
Quadrant: Part of a circle with radii making 90° with each
other is a quadrant (one-fourth of the circle). Circle and Arcs
Half of the circle is called a semi-circle. Exercise
Tangent: The tangent of a circle is a straight line just 1 Draw a tangent to a given circle of φφφφφ 50 mm at any
touching the circle at a point. It does not cut or pass through point `P' on it. (Fig 1)
the circle when extended.
Fig 1 shows all the above elements.
2 Draw a loop of 3 circles pattern. (Fig 2)
Draw any line MN and mark points A,B and C. So that
AB = 20 mm and BC = 25 mm.
Concentric circles: When two or more circles (drawn)
have a common centre, they are called concentric
circles. Ball-bearing is the best example of concentric
circles. (Fig 2)
Eccentric circles: Circles within a circle but with
different centres are called eccentric circles. (Fig 3)
38

--- Page 47 ---

3 3 Draw three circles tangential to each other if
centres A, B & C are given. (Fig 3)
5 Draw internal tangents to circles of the same
diameter 40 each and a centre distance of 60 mm.
(Fig 5)
4 Draw external tangents to circles of dia 40 and 30
and centre distance 60 mm. (Fig 4)
Engineering Drawing : (NSQF - Revised 2022) 1 Year Group 9 : Exercise 1.3.11 39

--- Page 48 ---

Group 9 - Engineering Trades Exercise 1.3.12
Engineering Drawing
Drawing of square, rectangle and parallelogram
A quadrilateral is a plane figure bounded by four sides and Procedure to draw the square, rectangle and
four angles. The sum of the four angles in a quadrilateral is parallelogram
(interior angles) equal to 360°. The side joining opposite
Square
corners is called diagonal. To construct a quadrilateral out
of four sides, four angles and two diagonals a minimum of 1 1st method (Fig 1): A square of side 50 mm by erecting
five dimensions are required of which two must besides. perpendicular.
Quadrilaterals are also referred as Trapezium. (Fig 1)
Types of quadrilaterals (Fig 1) 2 2nd method (Fig 2): A square of side 60 mm using
45° setsquare and compass.
• Square
• Rectangle
• Rhomboid / Parallelogram
Square: In a square all the four sides are equal and its four
angles are at right angles. The two diagonals are equal and
perpendicular to each other.
Rectangle (Fig 2): In a rectangle, opposite sides are equal
and parallel and all four angles are right angles.
Fig 2 shows a rectangle ABCD, Sides AB = DC and BC =
AD. Diagonals AC and BD are equal. Diagonals are not
bisected at right angles.
3 3rd method (Fig 3): A square of side 60 mm long by
erecting perpendicular and also using 45°
setsquare.
Rhomboid/Parallelogram (Fig 3): In a parallelogram,
opposite sides are equal and parallel. Opposite angles are
also equal. Diagonals are not equal but bisect each other.
40

--- Page 49 ---

4 Square having diagonal 60 mm (Fig 4) 7 Parallelogram (Fig 7)
Sides = 75 mm and 40 mm
Angle between them: 50°
5 Rectangle (Fig 5)
8 Parallelogram (Fig 8)
Side AB = 75 mm, side AD = 45 mm using setsquare and
compass. Parallelogram - Side AB = 60 mm
Diagonal AC = 90 mm ∠ABC = 120°
6 Rectangle - Diagonal - 60 mm and one side 20 mm
1st method (Fig 6a)
9 Parallelogram (Fig 9)
2nd method (Fig 6b)
Sides AB = 55 mm, BC = 40 mm and vertical height = 30
ADBC is the required rectangle of side 20 mm and
mm.
diagonal 60 mm.
Engineering Drawing : (NSQF - Revised 2022) 1 Year Group 9 : Exercise 1.3.12 41

--- Page 50 ---

Group 9 - Engineering Trades Exercise 1.3.13
Engineering Drawing
Drawing of ellipse & parabola
Ellipse
• Similarly obtain M . M & M as centres and B M
3 2 4 1 2
1 Construct an ellipse by concentric circle method. as radius, draw arcs P P & P P .
1 2 3 4
Major axis 80 mm. Minor axis 40 mm. (Fig 1)
• M M as centres and M P as radius, draw arcs P P
1 3 1 1 1 3
• Draw the major axis AB (80 mm) and minor axis CD & P P and complete the ellipse.
2 4
(40 mm), bisecting at right angle at 0.
• '0' as centre OA and OC as radius, draw two
concentric circles.
• Draw a number of radial lines through '0' (say 12)
cutting the two circles.
• Mark the points on the outer circle as a,b,c.
• Similarly mark the corresponding intersecting points
on inner circle as a',b',c'.
• From points such as a,b,c... draw lines parallel to
minor axis.
• From points such as a', b',c'.... draw lines parallel to
the major axis to intersect with the corresponding
vertical lines at points P , P P .... etc.
1 2, 3 3 Construct an ellipse by four centre method - Major axis
• Join all these points with a smooth curve by free
= 80 mm and Minor axis = 40 mm - Type B. (Fig 3)
hand or using "french curve" and form the ellipse.
• To find the 'Foci' - with half the major axis (a) as
radius and with 'C' on the minor axis as centre, draw
an arc cutting the major axis, at two points, mark
them as F F the focus points of the ellipse.
1 2
• Draw the rectangle EFGH (80 x 40) and draw AB &
CD represent major and minor axis.
2 Construct an ellipse by four centre method - Major axis
• Join EC
= 80 mm and Minor axis = 40 mm - Type A. (Fig 2)
• Bisect AE and mark P the mid-point.
• Draw the major axis A A and minor axis B B .
1 2 1 2
• Join DP meeting EC at K.
• Set off B M and B M equals to A B .
1 2 2 4 1 1
• Draw perpendicular bisectors of KD and extend DC
• Join A B and set off B B equal to a-b (a = OA , b
1 1 1 3 1 and locate point `S'.
= OB )
1
• 'S' as centre SD as radius draw the arc KD.
• Draw a bisector on A B which intersects A A at
1 3 1 2
M . • Similarly get the point 'R'.
1
42

--- Page 51 ---

• Join AK and draw perpendicular bisector on it, and 5 Abscissa: The distance along the axis XX' from vertex
meet AB at f . (V) and a point through which the double ordinate
1
passes is called the "Abscissa" VQ is the abscissa
• 'f ' as centre, Af as radius, draw an arc KK'.
1 1 corresponding to the ordinate PQ (Fig 5).
• Mark centre 'f ' so that Bf = Af .
2 2 1
• Now R, S, F & F are the four centres of the ellipse.
1 2
Similar to the procedure followed for drawing curves KD and
KK and complete the ellipse.
1
Follow the procedures given below and construct parabolic
curves in the work book.
4 Parabola: It is one of the conic sections.
When the cutting plane is parallel to the generators (slant
line) of the cone, (and inclined to the axis) the section
obtained is called "Parabola". (Fig 4)
Tangent and normal for the point T
• Draw TS perpendicular to directrix
• Draw TF
• Bisect angle STF, it will be tangential to parabola at P.
• Draw TN perpendicular to tangent will be normal at P.
A parabola can be constructed by any one of the following
methods:
Properties: Parabola is defined as the locus of a point • ordinate method
which moves so that the ratio of its distance from a fixed
• rectangle method
point F (called the focus) and a directrix bears a constant
and equal to 1 (Unity). • tangent method
In other words if the perpendicular distance of any point on • parallelogram method
the curve from a fixed line called directrix is equal to its
• offset method
distance from focus, the curve is called "Parabola". (Fig 5)
Practical application: Search lights, reflecting surfaces
Elements of Parabola
for light and sound, bridge arches, wall brackets and largely
Axis: It is a line (XX') perpendicular to the directrix and used in graphic methods for determining the stress upon
passing through the focus. beams and girders etc.
Vertex (V): It is the mid point of the perpendicular line 6 Parabola
drawn from focus to directrix.
Construct a Parabola from a given focus is at 50 mm
Ordinate: Perpendicular distance of any point P on the from the directrix. (Fig 6) - Ordinate method.
curve to the axis line PQ.
• Draw a vertical line D-D1 the directrix.
Double ordinate: When the ordinate is extended to meet
• Draw horizontal line XX1, the axis through any point
the curve on the other side. Crossing the axis, it is twice
X on the directrix.
the ordinate line P-Q-P1 is the double ordinate.
• Mark the focus 'F' on XX1 = 50 mm from X (on the
Latus rectum: The double ordinate which passes through
directrix).
the 'Focus' is called latus rectum. (LFL')
• Mark the mid point of XF, as V.
Engineering Drawing : (NSQF - Revised 2022) 1 Year Group 9 : Exercise 1.3.13 43

--- Page 52 ---

• Mark a number of points from V towards right side • Mark the intersecting points P , P , P , P on either
1 2 3 4
on the axis as 1,2,3,4..... side of axis.
• Draw vertical lines through these points as shown, • Form the parabola by joining the points BEC and
forming double ordinates. intersecting with a smooth curve, passing through
P , P .....
• Point 'F' as centre, X-1 as radius, draw arcs on the 1 2
co-ordinates (vertical lines) passing through 1, mark
points P & P '.
1 1
• X-2 as radius, F as centre, draw arcs on the 2nd
ordinate, mark P & P '.
2 2
• Similarly get point P , P .... P ', P ' etc. on the axis
3 4 3 4
as above.
• Join all the points with a smooth curve, by free hand
and form the parabola curve.
8 Parabolic curve of sides 80 and 60 making 60°/120°
Parallelogram method. (Fig 8)
• Procedure is similar to the exercise (11) rectangle
method of drawing a Parabolic curve.
7 Construct a Parabola given the base and axis of a
rectangle; base 80 mm, axis 25 mm - Rectangle
method. (Fig 7)
• Draw a rectangle ABCD of sides 80 mm & 25 mm.
• Mark centre points of AD and BC, as E and F, join
EF.
• Divide AB & CD and into any number of equal parts
9 Given the double ordinate, abscissa and distance
say 5. Also divide AE and ED into the same number
between vertices (Fig 9)
of equal parts and number them as shown.
• Draw a hyperbola with double ordinate 70 mm and
• From point E on AD, draw lines to the divisions on
abscissa 30 mm (rectangle method) and the
AB & CD.
transverse axis 70 mm.
• From the points on AED, draw parallel lines to EF.
44 Engineering Drawing : (NSQF - Revised 2022) 1 Year Group 9 : Exercise 1.3.13

--- Page 53 ---

• Draw the rectangle ABCD 70 x 30 mm.
• Mark the mid points V, X on AB and CD.
• Join VX and extend it outside to '0' 35 mm (70/2)
from V.
• Divide AD and BC into 4 equal parts. Mark them as
1,2,3,11,21,31.
• Join these points to V by straight lines.
• Divide DX;XC into 4 equal parts, each mark them as
a,b,c,c1,b1,a1.
• Join '0' to these points by straight lines.
• Mark the intersecting points as P ,P etc as shown.
1 2
• Join V-D-C with a smooth curve through P ,P ,P
1 2 3
etc.
Engineering Drawing : (NSQF - Revised 2022) 1 Year Group 9 : Exercise 1.3.13 45

--- Page 54 ---

Group 9 - Engineering Trades Exercise 1.3.14
Engineering Drawing
Drawing of lettering and numbering - Single stroke
Styles of lettering: Many styles of lettering are in use Lower case letters and numerals
today. However, a few styles which are commonly used are
shown in Fig 1. Width Letters/Numerals Width
(W)
1 i 1d
3 j,l 3d
4 f,t,l 4d
5 c,r 5d
6 a,b,d,e,g,h,k,n,o,p,q,s,u,v;3;5 6d
7 a,0 (zero), 2,4,6,7,0,8,9 7d
9 m 9d
10 w 10d
The width of different letters in terms of stroke (line) is as
follows:
Standard heights/Width: The standard heights Uppercase Lettering BIS SP: 46-2003
recommended by BIS SP: 46-2003 are in the progressive
ratio of “square root 2”. They are namely 2.5 - 3.5 - 5 - 7 -
Width (W) Capital letters
10 - 14 and 20 mm. The height of lower case letter (without
tail or stem) are 2.5, 3.5, 5, 7, 10 and 14 mm. 1 I
There are two standard ratios for the line thickness “d”. 4 J
They are A & B. In A = line thickness (d) is h/14 and in
5 C,E,F,L
B=line thickness (d) is h/10.
6 B,D,G,H,K,N,O,P,R,S,T,U & Z
Lowercase means small letters, as opposed to capital
letters. The word yes, is for example, is in lowercase, 7 A,M,Q,V,X,Y
while the word YES is in upper case. For many 9 W
programmes, this distinction is very important. Programmes
that distinguish between uppercase and lowercase are
Lower case letters and numerals
said to be case sensitive
The width of different letters in terms of “d” is as follows: Width (W) Letters/Numerals
Lettering A 1 i
2 l
Width Capital letters Width
(W) 3 j,l
1 I 1d 4 c,f,r,t
5 J,L 5d 5 a,b,d,e,g,h,k,n,o,,q,s,u,v,x,y,x
6 C,E,F 6d 0,2,3,5 to 9
7 B,D,G,H,K,N,O,P,R,S,T,U & Z 7d 0,2,3,5 to 9
8 A,Q,V,X,Y 8d 6 a,4
9 M 9d
12 W 12d
46

--- Page 55 ---

Spacing of letters: Recommended spacing between
For curved letters use a smooth freehand curve.
characters, a minimum spacing of baselines and minimum
spacing between words as per BIS SP: 46-2003 are given Print straight line letters using either scale or
below in Fig 2. set-squares.
To maintain the uniform thickness of the line,
use a conical point soft grade pencil and avoid
too much sharpness.
Guidelines of both top and bottom should always
be drawn with a sharp pencil.
Numerals 2.1 (Fig 2)
Lettering
Procedure
1 Print 10 mm single stroke capital letters and numerals
in vertical style using either scale or set-square and by
freehand. (Fig 1)
• Follow the same procedure of letters.
• `h' is height of numerals and `d' is the stroke thickness.
• Width of numerals in terms of `d' is as follows shown in
square grid (Fig 3).
2 Print 10 mm single stroke capital letters and numerals
• Draw horizontal parallel lines (thin lines) of 10 mm
in inclined style (Fig 4).
distance.
10 mm distances denote the height of the letter.
• Mark the width of the letters recommended by BIS
(IS:9609-1983)
The width of different letters in terms of `d' is as
follows: `d' indicates stroke thickness i.e d: h/
10.
Width Capital letters
(W)
1 I
4 J
5 C,E,F,L
6 B,D,G,H,K,N,O,P,R,S,T,U & Z
7 A,M,Q,V,X,Y
9 W
Engineering Drawing : (NSQF - Revised 2022) 1 Year Group 9 : Exercise 1.3.14 47

--- Page 56 ---

Practice the following lettering exercises in A3/A4 paper as per the given ratio
1 Single stroke inclined letters of ratio 7:6, 7:5, 7:4, 7:3, 7:1 (Fig 5)
48 Engineering Drawing : (NSQF - Revised 2022) 1 Year Group 9 : Exercise 1.3.14

--- Page 57 ---

2 Single stroke vertical letters of ratio 7:6, 7:5, 7.4, 7:3, 7:1 (Fig 6)
Engineering Drawing : (NSQF - Revised 2022) 1 Year Group 9 : Exercise 1.3.14 49

--- Page 58 ---

Group 9 - Engineering Trades Exercise 1.3.15
Engineering Drawing
Drawing of development of surfaces - Introduction
Surface develpoment of prism, pyramid, cylinder • Solids bounded by double curved surfaces. It is formed
projection & development, cone projection & by revolving a curve about a straightline. Eg. sphere,
development paraboloid etc. (Fig 3)
Development of surface - Introduction
The surfaces may be classified as follows:
• Solids bounded by plane surfaces. Eg. cube, prism,
pyramids etc. (Fig 1)
Methods of development
Parallel line method (Fig 4i): This is method used for
such of those object having parallel elements i.e developing
prisms and single curved surfaces like cylinders, in which
all the edges/generators of lateral surfaces are parallel to
• Solids bounded by single curved surfaces. It can be
each other.
unrolled to a plane. Eg. cylinder, cone etc. (Fig 2)
Radial line development (Fig 4ii): It is used for developing
the surfaces of pyramids and also for single curved surfaces
like cones, having its apex as centre and the slant edges
or generators are taken as radius for drawing its development.
Radial line development has the fold lines, coming from a
point which is known as apex.
50

--- Page 59 ---

Intersection: We are more convinced with the lines of Line method (Fig 8): Mark the points 1",2",3" on the
intersection formed when surfaces of two solid meet. Fig 5 circumference of the circle in the side view. (preferably
shows the few examples of lines of intersection. symmetrical)
Project from side view and locate points P ; P /P in plan.
2 1 3
Now these lines P - 3, P - 1 and P - 2 are the true lengths
3 1 2
of the generators or simply lines drawn from points 3, 1 and
2. These lines will also form the true lengths in the
elevation.
Intersection lines or just intersections are of great importance Draw projectors of indefinite lengths from points 1",2" & 3"
to both for making drawings for fabrication work. in the side view towards the elevation.
When drawing the views of intersecting solids, lines of To fix the position of the above projectors, draw projectors
intersection will have to be drawn in order to complete the vertically from points such as P /P and P to intersect with
views. For example Fig 6 shows a solid when two cylinders the corresponding lines in t 3 he 1 elevat 2 ion. Mark the
meet at right angles. Without the line of intersection cd, the intersecting points f ',f ',f ' and draw the required curve.
view is incomplete. To draw the intersection lines in its 1 2 3
Note: The above step was to simply transfer the true length
correct form, principle of projections have to be followed
of generators P - 1, P - 2 from plan to elevation.
and this will involve extensive geometrical construction. 1 2
Since we have drawn the projection of generators to get the
points f ',f ',f '. This method is called generator method.
1 2 3
This is also called as line method.
Cutting plane method (Fig 9): In cutting plane method,
we assume that the cylinders are cut by a series of parallel
cutting planes passing through such points as 3-3, 2-2 etc.
In figure 9, the cylinders are shown after they are cut by a
plane passing through 3 - 3. The line f3 - 3 is the same as
the generating line f3' - 3" in the front view of figure and
hence the rest of the procedure is same as that of line
In fabrication work, especially in sheet metal fabrication
method.
accurate intersection lines are a must for drawing development.
For example, the development of the part 2 of Fig 6 is shown
in Fig 7. The accuracy of the fabricated cylinder is much
dependent on the accuracy of the curve cd. To plot the line
cd, intersection line cd (Fig 6) has to be drawn accurately.
Depending on the nature of the meeting surfaces, intersection
lines may be straight lines or curves. When both the Note: Though both line method and cutting plane method
mating surfaces are flat (plain) intersection will be straight are appearing to be same, they are conceptually different.
lines (Fig 5c). If one or both the mating surfaces are curved, While any one method can be followed in many cases, but
the intersection lines are curved. (Fig 5a,b & d) cutting plane method is more useful in solving cases in
which none of the projections shows a line view of the
To plot the points required for drawing the intersection curve
surface of a solid.
we can use either the line method or cutting plane method.
Engineering Drawing : (NSQF - Revised 2022) 1 Year Group 9 : Exercise 1.3.15 51

--- Page 60 ---

Group 9 - Engineering Trades Exercise 1.3.16
Engineering Drawing
Drawing of development of surfaces - Procedure
Practice of Surface development of prism, pyramid, • Draw another rectangle CD A B on CD of size to 40
1 1
cylinder projection & development, cone projection x 20 mm, the end faces of the prism. Figure
& development obtained is the development of the total prism.
Procedure
1 Draw the development of the surfaces of a cube of side
30 mm. (Fig 1)
• Draw the elevation and plan of the cube.
• From the front view stretch out (Project) the line AA
& A'A' from points b' b' horizontally.
1
• Set off AB, BC, CD & DA equal to 30 mm each. (side
3 Draw the development of the lateral surface of a open
of square)
hexagonal prism of side 20 mm and height 60 mm.
• From C & D draw perpendiculars and mark off/CB' & (Fig 3)
DA' equals to 30 mm.
• Similarly erect perpendiculars from points C' & D'
such that C'B' & D'A' equals to 30 mm.
1 1
• Darken the lines as shown in Fig 1 to get the required
development of the cube.
2 Draw the development of the surface/a rectangular
prism of size 40 mm x 20 mm and height 60 mm by
parallel line method. (Fig 2)
• Draw a rectangle of length equals to the perimeter of
the prism. Length = 2 (l + b) = 120 mm and height
equals to the height of prism (60 mm).
• Mark AB; BC; CD and DA equals to 40, 20, 40 & 20
mm respectively.
• Draw the elevation and plan of the hexagonal prism.
• Draw perpendiculars from the points A,B,C,D and
mark as A', B', C', D'. • Project A'A' & AA from the elevation C'C' shall be
1
• Draw a rectangle A'B'C'D' on A'B' of size 40 x 20 mm. equal to 6 x 20 = 120 mm.
52

--- Page 61 ---

• On A'A' set of A'1, 1-2, 2-3 etc. equal to the side of
the hexagon.
• Through A', 1,2,3 etc, draw vertical lines meet at AA,
1',2',3' etc to complete the required lateral surface
development of the hexagonal prism.
4 Draw the development of surfaces of the box. (Fig 4)
6 Draw the development of the lateral surface of an open
cylindrical drum of dia 30 mm and height is 60 mm.
(Fig 6)
• Draw the plan and elevation of the drum as stated.
• Project the front view and draw the side view to a
• Assume there is no slope surface and draw the
length of circumference of the base of the cylinder.
development of cube of side 60 mm as given in Fig4.
Circumference = π D = π x 30 mm = 94.26 or 94.3
• Draw lines PQ and RS in the surfaces 1 and 3 in the
basic development equivalent the shape shown in Rectangle thus formed is the development of cylinder.
the isometric view of the box.
• Similarly join a rectangle of size equal to the surface
7 shown in isometric view with line RS or PQ and
complete the development after erasing the
construction lines.
5 Draw the development of a rectangular prism as stated
under and as shown in Figure. Prism is cut by a cutting
plane at 30°, 30 mm from base on width side. (Fig 5)
• Draw the top view and front view of the rectangular
prism.
• Mark 30 mm on front view from b' (c') to meet the line
b'b' at m'
1
• At m' make an angle of 30° such that the cutting
7 Draw the development of a cone of base 60 mm and
plane meet the line a'-a' at n'.
1' height 40 mm. (Fig 7)
• Project b', m', n' horizontally and mark of AB = 35,
• Draw the plan and elevation of the cone.
BC = 15, CD = 35 & DA = 15 mm.
• Divide the plan circle into number of equal parts (say
• From A,B,C,D,A of the front view, draw vertical lines
12 parts) and mark.
and mark points 3, 4,1,2 & 3.
• Draw 1-4' and 2-3' perpendiculars to 1-2 equals to 15 Development is more accurate if the number of
mm and draw CB & DA perpendicular to CD and equal parts are more.
1 1
equals to 15 mm.
• Project these parts to the base of the cone.
• Darken the lines throughout the development of the
• Join these points to the vertex of the cone.
given prism.
Engineering Drawing : (NSQF - Revised 2022) 1 Year Group 9 : Exercise 1.3.16 53

--- Page 62 ---

• Locate O vertex for the development of cone.
1
• Draw an arc from the vertex as centre and length of
slope as radius.
• Set divider on the straight distance between two
consecutive points on the plan.
• Transfer the distance along the arc as many times
according to the divisions on the plan.
• Join points 1 O 1and complete the development.
1
This method is only an approximate method.
The straight line distance taken is slightly
smaller than the arc length. More accurate
method is by calculating actual circumference
and dividing it into number of segments.
9 Draw the development of the lateral surface of the cone
as positioned. (Fig 8)
12 Draw the development of the lateral surface of the
• Draw the views of the cone and cutting plane on it. frustum of a square pyramid as positioned. (Fig 9a)
• Divide the base into any number of equal parts, say
12 and mark them.
• Project the points on to FV and join to the apex.
• Mark the points on the cutting plane and draw lines
parallel to base, touching the generator at 1 ,2 ....7.
1 1 1
These are the true lengths from 0'.
• Draw the sector with slope as radius.
radius of cone base circle
Sector angle θ = x 360°
Slant height length (s)
• Mark O and set angle θ.
1
• Transfer the true lengths on the cone on to the
sectors and join by smooth curve.
The area between this curve and the arc is the development
of the lateral surface.
54 Engineering Drawing : (NSQF - Revised 2022) 1 Year Group 9 : Exercise 1.3.16

--- Page 63 ---

• Draw the front view and plan of the pyramid. (Fig 9b) • The parts (A & B)of the funnel are in the shapes of
None of lines in these views show the true length of frustum of cones.
slant edge.
• Development of cone and frustum of cone are
• Transfer OP in plan to xt in front view. Join o't' by already dealt in earlier exercises. Follow the previous
straight line. o't' is the true length of slant edge. procedures and draw the developments of both parts
A and B.
• With `O' as centre draw the development of whole
pyramid. (Follow the steps of the exercise 10) Formula for finding angle
• With `O' as centre set off OA, OB, OC, OD & OA Radius of base cone circle
  x 360
equal to O'U' in front view. (Fig 9c)
Slant height
• Join AB, BC, CD, DA. Surface bounded by
11 The cylinders A & B are positioned as shown, (Fig 11)
ABCDATSRQP is the development.
intersects each other at right angles. Draw the plan,
10 Draw the development of the lateral surface of a funnel elevation, side view and show the curve of intersection.
as positioned. (Fig 10)
12 Draw the three views of cylinder `A' as shown in
position. (Fig 12)
Engineering Drawing : (NSQF - Revised 2022) 1 Year Group 9 : Exercise 1.3.16 55

--- Page 64 ---

• Draw the side view of the cylinder `B', as circle of • Draw horizontal projectors on to the vertical cylinder
diameter equals to 40 mm, such that its centre is the (A).
mid-point of the axis of cylinder `A'.
• The line 1 - 1 in top view intersects the circle at p
1 1
• Divide the circle into 12 equal parts and number & q .
1
them.
• Draw vertical projectors from these intersection
• Draw the front view and top view of cylinder `B' points P & q to intersect the line 1'1', in front view
1 1
projecting from the side view of the horizontal cylinder. at p' and q ' respectively.
1 1
Note: Consider that a number of horizontal section planes • Considering the second horizontal plane 2 2 in top
1
passing through the generators of the horizontal cylinder to view, obtain the corresponding point in the front view
cut both cylinders. For all the horizontal sectional planes, P' (p' , q' ) and q' .
2 12 12 2
the sectional top view will always be a circle of `n' diameter.
• Repeat the same procedure for other series of
Also the sectional top view of the vertical cylinder will be a
section planes passing through generators, obtain
circle of `m' diameter.
intersection points in front view.
• Draw series of cutting planes on the end view of
Join the obtained intersection points in the front view by a
cylinder `B'.
smooth curve, which is the curve of intersection of cylinders
A & B as stated.
56 Engineering Drawing : (NSQF - Revised 2022) 1 Year Group 9 : Exercise 1.3.16

--- Page 65 ---

Group 9 - Engineering Trades Exercise 1.4.17
Engineering Drawing
Dimensioning - Types of arrow heads and leader line with text
Dimension line: These are thin continuous lines,
terminated at ends by arrowheads, dots or oblique lines
touching the extension line. (Fig 1)
A dimension line may cut or cross another dimension line Dimension to the hidden lines be avoided. (Fig 2)
where there is no other way.
Arrowheads may be placed outside where space is included angle between 15° and 90°. They may be open,
insufficient. closed or closed and filled in. Oblique strokes are drawn as
short lines inclined at 45°. (Fig 1)
Leader line: It is a thin continuous line. It connects a note
or dimension with the features to which it applies. (Fig 2) Indicating dimensional values on drawings: All
dimensional values shall be shown on drawings in characters
Termination and Origin indication: The size of the
of sufficient size to ensure complete legibility on the
terminations (arrowheads/oblique strokes) shall be
original drawings as well as on reproductions made from
proportional to the size of the drawing. Only one style of
micro-filming.
arrowhead shall be used on a single drawing. However,
where the space is too small for the arrowheads, it may be They shall be placed in such a way that they are not
substituted by a dot or by an oblique line. Arrowheads are crossed or separated by any other line on the drawing.
drawn as short lines forming barbs at any convenient
57

--- Page 66 ---

Group 9 - Engineering Trades Exercise 1.4.18
Engineering Drawing
Dimensioning - Position of dimensioning (aligned, unidirectional)
Definitions related to dimensioning Methods of indicating values
Dimension: It is a numerical value expressed as an
Methods of indicating values: There are two methods
appropriate unit of measurement and indicated graphically
used for indicating the values. Only one method should be
on technical drawings with lines, symbols and notes.
used on anyone drawing.
Size dimensions: Gives the size of a component, part,
Method 1 Aligned system
hole, slot, depth, width, radius etc.
Dimensional values shall be placed parallel to their
eg: L1, L3, H, h1, S etc. (Fig 1)
dimension lines and preferably near the middle, above and
clear of the dimension line. However, values shall be
indicated so that they can be read from the bottom of the
the right-hand side of the drawing. Dimension lines should
not be broken. Dimensioning of angles is also given in the
same way. (Fig 1) This method is known as an aligned
system of dimensioning.
Location dimension: Gives or fixes the relationship of the
features. viz centre of holes, slots and any significant
forms. (Fig 1)
eg: L4, L5, L6
Feature: It is an individual characteristic such as a flat Method 2 Unidirectional system
surface. Cylindrical surface, shoulder, screw thread, a slot,
Dimensional values shall be indicated so that they can be
a curve or profile etc. (Fig 2)
read from the bottom of the drawing sheet. Non-horizontal
dimension lines are interrupted, preferably near the middle
so that the value can be inserted. (Fig 2). This method is
termed a unidirectional system of dimensioning.
Extension line: It is a thin line projecting from the feature
and extending beyond the dimension line. (Fig 3)
Arrangement and indication of dimensions
The arrangement of dimensioning on a drawing shall
indicate clearly the design purpose.
The arrangements of dimensioning are:
• Chain dimensioning
• Dimensioning from a common feature
• Dimensioning by co-ordinates
• Combined dimensioning.
58

--- Page 67 ---

Chain dimensioning: It is used where the possible
accumulation of tolerances does not infringe (effect) on the
functional requirement of the component. (Fig 3)
Dimensioning from a common feature is used where
several dimensions of the same direction relate to a
common origin.
Dimensioning from a common feature may be executed as
parallel dimensioning or as superimposed running
dimensioning.
Parallel dimensioning: Dimensions of features are taken
from one datum/common origin and are shown parallel to
another and placed so that the dimensional values can
easily be added in Fig 4. When the drawing is clear, symbols or abbreviation viz. dia,
Pcd and angle can be omitted. (Fig 8)
Combined dimensioning: Dimensions are given in chain
dimensioning and parallel dimensioning. The common
feature is combined. (Fig 5)
Dimensioning periphery: The features on the periphery
can be shown as given in the figure, indicating width, depth
and number of slots. (Fig 9)
Dimensioning a chord: For dimensioning of the chord,
refer Fig 6. It is shown as linear size.
Dimensioning an arc/radius: A small arc is shown over
the dimension value, while dimensioning an arc. (Fig 7)
Engineering Drawing : (NSQF - Revised 2022) 1 Year Group 9 : Exercise 1.4.18 59

--- Page 68 ---

Group 9 - Engineering Trades Exercise 1.4.19
Engineering Drawing
Practice of dimensioning
1 To the given drawing of the profile sheet metal as shown
in Fig 1, place the dimensions in the aligned system.
(Fig 1a)
• Draw the drawing of the sheet metal to 1:1 scale.
• Draw the extension lines in continuation of outlines.
• Draw the dimension lines. (Fig 1b)
• Place the dimension value near the middle and
above the dimension line to be read from "bottom
and right hand side" of the drawing.
3 Draw the two sheet metal templates to full scale with
appropriate lines use 0.5 range line thickness. (Fig 3)
• Draw a rectangular block of length 80 mm and width
50 mm in thin lines.
• Incorporate the features of the template as per the
given dimension.
• Draw by thick lines all visible outlines.
• Give dimensions and maintain the line thickness as
per the line range (0.5).
• Complete the figure and remove the unwanted lines.
2 To the given drawing of the profile sheet metal as shown
in Fig 2a, give the dimensions in the unidirectional
system. (Fig 2b)
• Place the horizontal dimensions above and middle
of the dimension line without break.
• Break the dimension in the middle of all non-
horizontal dimension lines. (Fig 2b)
60

--- Page 69 ---

4 Draw the figures given. Maintain the types of lines as per
the B.I.S and choose correct line thickness. (Fig 4)
• According to the given dimensions, draw the figures
given in Fig 4.
• Select the appropriate lines and maintain uniformity.
• Remove (erase) unwanted lines, arcs and complete
the drawing.
Note: Draw the dimension line terminations as
per IS:11669-1986.
5 The motor cycle engine gasket is shown in figure 5.
There are some mistakes in dimensioning. Reproduce
the same in the A3/A4 sheet provided and correct the
mistakes according to the aligned system of
dimensioning. (Fig 5)
Engineering Drawing : (NSQF - Revised 2022) 1 Year Group 9 : Exercise 1.4.19 61

--- Page 70 ---

6 Draw the given cover plate and give the dimensions in 7 Draw the cover plate given in the figure and place the
the aligned system. (Fig 6) dimensions in the unidirectional system. (Fig 7)
62 Engineering Drawing : (NSQF - Revised 2022) 1 Year Group 9 : Exercise 1.4.19

--- Page 71 ---

Group 9 - Engineering Trades Exercise 1.5.20
Engineering Drawing
Concept and reading of drawing in - Concept of axes plane and quadrant
An engineering drawing conveys many different types of
information of which the most important thing is the shape
of the object. Fig 1 shows a sample drawing. In this
drawing, the shape of the part is represented by three
views.
Projection: Projection is a commonly used term in
draughtsman's vocabulary. In the context of engineering
drawing, projectors mean images.
Projections or images can also be formed in between the
eyes and the object by keeping a transparent plane.
(Fig 4)
For an untrained person, it will be very difficult to conceive
the shape of the object from the above drawing.
But in Fig 2, the same object is shown pictorially in a
different way and the shape is easily understood even by
a layman.
Figure 1 is called a Multiview drawing or Orthographic
drawing and figure 2 is called a pictorial drawing.
Fig 3, wherein a cube with a circular hole is represented
pictorially. We know that all corners of the cube are 90°.
In this figure 4, the rays from the object converge to the
But in the pictorial drawing in Fig 3, the same 90° is
eyes and this image (Projection) is smaller than the object.
represented at some places by acute angles and some
However, if the rays are parallel as in the case of rays
other places by obtuse angles.
coming from the sun, the image (Projection) will be of the
same size as that of the objects. Such a projection is called
63

--- Page 72 ---

orthographic projection. The parallel lines/rays drawn from
the object are called projectors and the plane on which the
image is formed is called the plane of projection. In
orthographic projection, the projectors are perpendicular to
the plane of projection. (Fig 5)
To draw two views of an object, we assume that the object
is placed in any one of the quadrant/angles, 1st angle & 3rd
angle (Fig 8a & 9a) and its top and front view are projected
An orthographic system of projection is the method of to the respective planes.
representing the exact shape and size of a three-
Now to make it possible to draw the two views (Front & Top
dimensional object on a drawing sheet or any other plain
view) in one plane i.e the plane of the drawing paper, the
surface such as a drawing board.
horizontal plane is assumed to be unfolded in a clockwise
A single orthographic view of an object will show only two direction through 90° (Fig 8b & 9b). We proceed this way
of its three dimensions. The view in figure 6 shows only the when the views are made. When the object is placed in the
length and height of the object alone. 2nd or fourth quadrant the front and top will get superimposed
(one upon the other) (Fig 10a & b).
Therefore, it becomes necessary to have an additional view
to show the missing dimensions (width). Hence, we have
to make two views to represent the three dimensions of an
object.
The two views thus required are to be obtained on two
different planes which are mutually perpendicular (one HP
and one VP) with the object remaining in the same position.
The projection or the view obtained on the horizontal plane
is called the top view or plan and the view obtained on the
vertical plane is called elevation.
First angle and third angle projection: One vertical plane
(VP) and one horizontal plane (HP) intersect at right angles Due to this reason, the 2nd and 4th angles are not used for
to each other. (Fig 7) making engineering drawings as the three dimensions
cannot be easily identified. Hence for representing the
All four quadrants have one HP and one VP formation. As
three dimensions of the object, we assume the object is
per convention in mathematics, the quadrants are numbered
placed either in the 1st angle or in the 3rd angle
as 1st, 2nd, 3rd and 4th. These four quadrants are called four
(Fig 11&12) respectively.
dihedral angles, namely 1st angle, 2nd angle, 3rd angle and
4th angle.
64 Engineering Drawing : (NSQF - Revised 2022) 1 Year Group 9 : Exercise 1.5.20

--- Page 73 ---

Engineering Drawing : (NSQF - Revised 2022) 1 Year Group 9 : Exercise 1.5.20 65

--- Page 74 ---

Group 9 - Engineering Trades Exercise 1.5.21
Engineering Drawing
Concept and reading of drawing in - Concept of orthographic projection and
isometric projection
Concept of Orthographic projection In this exercise, the faces of the prism are parallel to the
planes of projection. Therefore all the line's orthographic
Method 1
projections are vertical and horizontal only.
Draw the orthographic projection (front, top and side views)
Visualise the shape of the object and imagine the shape
of the square sheet (40 mm side) kept perpendicular to HP
description of views. Surface ABCD (Fig 2B) is only visible
and parallel to VP. (I angle) (Fig 1)
from the elevation. At the same time, all four sides of ABCD
are isometric lines. Therefore in the elevation, a rectangle
of 40 x 30 mm is seen.
• Draw the XY line.
• Draw the square with its centre 40 mm above the XY line
and one edge parallel to the XY line.
• Mark the corners of the figure a', b', c' & d'. This will be
the front of the square.
• Draw the vertical projectors from a'b' downward beyond
the XY line.
• Draw a horizontal line dc at a distance of 20 mm below
the XY line. Line dc will be the plan.
• Draw a X'Y' line at a convenient distance from b'c',
intersecting the XY line at `0'.
• Project the top to the X Y line meeting at e.
• By arc method transfer Oe to XY and mark the point `f' • Draw XY line of convenient length. (Fig 2B)
at a" and d" respectively. Now the line a"d" is the side • Draw a rectangle a'b'c'd' on the XY line. This will be the
view. front view of the prism.
Method 2: Rectangular prism • Project the vertical sides of the front view (a'd' and b'c')
downwards beyond the XY line.
Draw the Top, Front and side views of the rectangular prism
of base 30 x 20 mm and height 40 mm. (Fig 2A) • Draw a horizontal line fg approximately 20 mm below
the XY line.
66

--- Page 75 ---

• Draw a rectangle fgba of 30 x 20 mm size. This will be In this problem, the circular faces are parallel to VP.
the plan of the prism. Therefore the front is a circle resting on the XY line. Plan
and end views are rectangles of size 30 mm x 20 mm.
• Project points b' and c' horizontally a convenient length
to the right side of the elevation. • Draw the circle of diameter 20 mm touching the XY line.
(Fig 3B)
• Transfer the width of the top view GB by the arc and
locate points e"d" on the XY line. • Draw the plan projecting it from the elevation.
• Project e"d" vertically up and locate points f"a"d"e" is • Draw the end view by drawing a projection on it, from the
the left side view of the prism. plan and elevation.
• Draw the top, front and side views of a cylinder whose
Method 3 : Cylinder
base diameter is 35 mm and height 50 mm when its
Draw the top, front and side view of a cylinder of diameter position is as shown in Fig 3C.
20 mm and length of 30 mm. (Fig 3A)
Method 4: Cone
Draw the multi-views of the cone shown in Fig 4A. Follow
the procedures of the earlier exercises and draw the multi-
views. (Fig 4B)
Method 5
Identify the surfaces of the block shown in the isometric
view with the corresponding multi-views and fill the numerals
in the given tabulation column. (Fig 5)
The surfaces are parallel and perpendicular to the plane of
projection.
• Study the isometric view and the corresponding multi-
views carefully.
Engineering Drawing : (NSQF - Revised 2022) 1 Year Group 9 : Exercise 1.5.21 67

--- Page 76 ---

• You may observe that the surfaces seen in one view are
represented by lines in the other two views.
• In this exercise, the surface `A' shown in the isometric
view is seen as a line in the front elevation and numbered
as `5' in the front view of the corresponding multi-views.
• The same surface `A' in the side view is seen as a line
and numbered `6' in the side view of the multi-views.
• Similarly, the surface `A' seen from the top of the
isometric views is numbered as `10' in the plan of the
multi-views, whereas the full surface area is visible.
When a surface is parallel or perpendicular to the plane of
projection vice-versa in a multi-views drawing, the full area
of the surface will be seen in anyone the three views (plan,
elevation and side view) and in the other two views, the
corresponding line of the surface will be seen.
Method 6
Draw the isometric view (Fig 6) and also draw the three
views in the workbook.
The orthographic projection shows the shape of a component
by drawing several views each looking at a different side of
the component.
A minimum of two views are required to represent a
component. To clarify the internal and external details a
minimum of three views are to be drawn. They are:
• Elevation or Front view or Front elevation. (F)
• Plan or Top view. (P)
• Side view or side elevation or end elevation. (S)
In Fig 6, surface `A' is only seen when looking at the front
of the figure. All the lines in the isometric view are isometric.
Therefore in the orthographic projection, the front view will
be like this. (Fig 7)
In the plan surfaces `C', `D' and `F' are visible and the
bottom surface will not visible. The line joining the two
surfaces will not be visible. The line joining the surfaces will
appear in the plan as a hidden line. (Fig 8)
In the side view surface `B' is visible and surfaces `E' and
back bottom surfaces are invisible. Due to this reason the
line joining `D' and `E', also the line joining back bottom
surfaces are appearing in the side view by a hidden line.
(Fig 9)
68 Engineering Drawing : (NSQF - Revised 2022) 1 Year Group 9 : Exercise 1.5.21

--- Page 77 ---

Pictorial drawing (isometric drawing)
Pictorial drawing: Even a common man can understand
easily the shape of an object quickly by a picture or by a
pictorial drawing. It is also called three-dimensional drawing.
Pictorial drawings are very useful for describing the shape
of a piece part or component, even though they have a
distorted look.
Three types of pictorial drawings are (Fig 1)
• Isometric drawing
• Oblique drawing
• Perspective drawing
Out of the above three types, isometric drawings are very
much preferred by machine shops and metalworking • Draw two vertical lines parallel to the line AH through
trades groups. But perspective drawings are popular in the points B and D.
civil engineering group of trades.
• Similarly draw two more lines parallel to AB and AD
through point H.
• Mark G and E the intersecting points.
• Draw lines parallel to GH and HE through points G and
E intersecting point is F.
• Draw lines parallel to AB & AD through points D and B
respectively intersecting at C.
• Join CB & CD with dash lines.
• Join F and C also with dash lines.
• Rub off the construction lines and complete the prism.
2 Stepped block - 1
Draw the isometric view of the stepped block given in
Fig 2.
Isometric drawing
Procedure • Draw the isometric view of a rectangular prism of
dimensions equal to the overall size of the block 45 x 25
1 Rectangular prism
x 30 mm.
Draw the isometric drawing of a rectangular prism of
• Draw the lines JD, DE, EF, FH, HI and IJ using the
base 15 mm x 30 mm and the height of 50 mm. (Fig 1)
measurements given in the figure.
• Draw the three isometric axes through point `A'.
• Rub off SR, RD, SJ, SH and RF.
• Mark AB = 15 mm, AD = 30 mm and AH = 50 mm
• Darken the remaining lines of the stepped block.
representing the three sides of prism.
Engineering Drawing : (NSQF - Revised 2022) 1 Year Group 9 : Exercise 1.5.21 69

--- Page 78 ---

3 Stepped block - 2 With the experiences gained in previous exercises of
drawing isometric views, draw the following exercises 4 &
Draw the isometric view of the components shown. (Fig 3)
5 and complete the same.
• Draw the stepped block as per dimension. Follow the
Practice 1 to 3 (Figs 4,5 &6)
procedure given in the previous Ex. No.2.
• Mark points to UTSV as per dimension on the top of the
surface EDGF (Fig 3b)
• Join points UTSV.
• Project vertically downwards from the points UTSV and
obtain the point WXYZ at the bottom surface such that
UW, TX, SY & VZ are equal to 10 mm. Join the point
WXYZ and draw the thick lines which are all visible and
dotted lines that are not visible
All construction lines should be in thin lines.
After completion of the isometric views, in
each case erase the unwanted lines and
construction lines.
70 Engineering Drawing : (NSQF - Revised 2022) 1 Year Group 9 : Exercise 1.5.21

--- Page 79 ---

Draw the isometric view of the machined block having non-
isometric lines. (Fig 6)
Engineering Drawing : (NSQF - Revised 2022) 1 Year Group 9 : Exercise 1.5.21 71

--- Page 80 ---

Group 9 - Engineering Trades Exercise 1.5.22
Engineering Drawing
Method of 1st angle and 3rd angle projections (Definition and difference)
Symbol of 1st angle and 3rd angle projection as per IS specification
1 a Draw the symbol for 1st angle projection as per IS 2 a Draw the symbol for 1st angle projection as per IS
specification, if bigger dia D is 50 mm. specification, if smaller dia D/2 is 20 mm.
b Draw the symbol for 3rd angle projection as per IS b Draw the symbol for 3rd angle projection as per IS
specification, if bigger dia D is 40 mm.
specification, if smaller dia D/2 is 15 mm.
72

--- Page 81 ---

Method of 1st angle and 3rd angle projections The placement of the front and top views when the horizontal
plane is unfolded will be different in these two systems. It
1st Angle projection (Fig 1)
may be observed in Fig 3, that the first angle projection plan
(top views) will be directly below the front view (Fig 4),
whereas in 3rd angle projection top view lies directly above
the elevation. (Fig 5)
Views can be drawn in any one of these two methods.
However Indian Standard (BIS) has recommended the first
angle method to be used in our country.
3rd Angle projection (Fig 2)
The two views thus required are to be obtained on two
different planes which are mutually perpendicular (one HP
and one VP) with the object remaining in the same position.
The projection or the view obtained on the horizontal plane
is called the top view or plan and the view obtained on the
vertical plane is called elevation.
Engineering Drawing : (NSQF - Revised 2022) 1 Year Group 9 : Exercise 1.5.22 73

--- Page 82 ---

Group 9 - Engineering Trades Exercise 1.6.23
Engineering Drawing
Symbolic representaion - Different symbols used in the sheet metal trade
74

--- Page 83 ---

Different operations of bend by press brake (Fig 15)
Engineering Drawing : (NSQF - Revised 2022) 1 Year Group 9 : Exercise 1.6.23 75

--- Page 84 ---

Practice on snap locked seam (Fig 16)
76 Engineering Drawing : (NSQF - Revised 2022) 1 Year Group 9 : Exercise 1.6.23

--- Page 85 ---

Group 9 - Engineering Trades Exercise 1.7.24
Engineering Drawing
Reading of job drawing related to sheet metal trade
Read and write the following. (Fig 1) Read and write the following. (Fig 5)
1 Which type of notch used for making rectangular box? 1 What is the name of Duct?
2 What is the name of joining?
3 What is the purpose of notch?
Read and write the following. (Fig 6)
1 Where rectangular duct used?
2 Why the ridges are provided in the duct?
Read and write the following. (Fig 2)
1 What are the joints are in Duct work?
2 What are the folding in the ducting and write the name?
3 What are the bending in duct and write the name?
4 What is the use of duct?
Read and write the following. (Fig 7)
1 What is the name of joint ‘A’?
2 What is the name of joint ‘B’?
Read and write the following. (Fig 3)
1 What is the types of notch?
Read and write the following. (Fig 8)
1 What is the name of the joint ‘A’?
Read and write the following. (Fig 4)
1 What type of notch used in the Fig 4?
2 What is thename of acitivity?
Read and write the following. (Fig 9)
1 Write the name of ‘A’?
2 Write the name of ‘B’?
3 Write the name of ‘C’?
77

--- Page 86 ---

4 Write the name of ‘D’?
5 Write the name of ‘E’?
6 Write the name of ‘F’?
Read and write the following. (Fig 14)
1 What is the name of ‘C’?
2 What is the name of ‘D’?
3 What does X refers?
Read and write the following. (Fig 10)
1 Why G.I wire to be inserted?
Read and write the following. (Fig 15)
1 What is the name of joint?
Read and write the following. (Fig 11) 2 What does ½T refers?
1 What is the name of activity?
Read and write the following. (Fig 16)
Read and write the following. (Fig 12)
1 What is the name of joint?
1 What is the name of hammer?
2 What is the angle of ‘A’?
2 What is the name of tool ‘A’?
Read and write the following. (Fig 13)
1 What is the angle of slant notch?
78 Engineering Drawing : (NSQF - Revised 2022) 1 Year Group 9 : Exercise 1.7.24

--- Page 87 ---

Read and write the following. (Fig 17) Read and write the following. (Fig 19)
1 What is the name of joint? 1 What is the meaning of flange joint?
2 What is the angle of joint?
Read and write the following. (Fig 20)
Read and write the following. (Fig 18) 1 What is the name of bend?
1 What is the name of joint? 2 What is the angle of ‘A’?
3 What is the angle of ‘B’?
Engineering Drawing : (NSQF - Revised 2022) 1 Year Group 9 : Exercise 1.7.24 79

--- Page 88 ---

Read and write the following. (Fig 21) 3 What is the name of joints ‘C’?
1 What is the name of joints ‘A’? 4 What is the name of joints ‘D’?
2 What is the name of joints ‘B’? 5 What is the name of joints ‘E’?
80 Engineering Drawing : (NSQF - Revised 2022) 1 Year Group 9 : Exercise 1.7.24